               REVISION HISTORY for SAC DATABASE

The goal of the people working on the Saguaro Astronomy Club database has
been to provide a listing which could yield an observing list for use at
the telescope.  The early versions covered plenty of objects for users of
scopes up to 8" in size.  As we added more objects and data, the list
became more massive and we believe that it now covers a large portion of
what could be seen in a telescope in the 10" to 14" range.  Addition of
many more objects will add many small and faint galaxies, seeing as that
is about all that remains below 14 magnitude.  We do not relish this task
and probably will not undertake such a large work.

Version 1.0 consisted of 1100 objects down to a magnitude limit of about
11.5.  It was also the beginning of the navstar and multistr files.

Version 2.0 started to add a variety of objects from the RNGC.  We soon
discovered an excellent list of corrections from Brian Skiff and Dr.
Harold Corwin.

Version 3.0 should not be used.  It is easy to spot the erroneous
data.  Look at M31, the Andromeda Galaxy, if its' declination is -31,
that is the bad version!!  We certainly learned a lot about
maintaining back ups to data.

Version 4.0 combined data from version 2.0 with the data input by Jeff
Weintraub from Sky Catalog 2000.  This version contains much good info
and started to show us how massive a fairly complete deep sky database
was going to get.  This was the first version to contain Dan Ward's
Report Generator.  This version was compressed with PKPAK 3.61.

After the release of version 4.0 many SAC members joined together in a
combined effort to try and find as much info as we could on objects each
person was assigned.  The listing of who-did-what is in SACDOC.TXT.
Several intermediate versions were compiled within the club, and then:

Version 5.0 fixed some problems with the DESCR field and included all the
NOTES which members had found.  With the inclusion of multistr, navstar,
potporri and Jim Lucyk's photondx files, this was the best version to date.
A medium to large telescope owner with good skies can keep busy with
version 5 for many observing sessions.  A.J. Crayon's install program will
put this version onto hard disk.  The files are no larger than 360K each,
to accommodate BBS operators.  SAC Report Generator has been rewritten to
include several more features.  This version was compressed with the
old compression algorithm so that we would only have to include ARCE on
disk to un-arc the files.

Version 5.1 fixed a small problem with the Report Generator.  It can now
search for objects with lower case characters in the name, such as
Cr or Tr.  If you are using your own database manager or if you do not
use SACREP to search for individual objects, the update is unnecessary.

Version 5.2 added several corrections, given in the file "errata50.txt".
Dan Ward updated the Report Generator.

Several internal versions existed within the SAC as we updated the
information and Dan Ward set up Report Generator to accomodate the
changes.  We dropped the SOURCE field, finding that we where doing a
poor job of keeping track of where each objects info source.  We
added the SUBR field with info from RC3 on surface brightness.
Sizes of several fields changed as the NOTES and NGC DESCR fields
got larger.  U2 and TIR fields got smaller because we found that
we did not need to provide multiple chart numbers for each object.

Version 6.0 contains all the changes mentioned above and accompanying
changes made to Report Generator.

Version 6.1 incorporates several changes which I believe are well
worth doing.  First, the database is in one large file and not
small pieces, RA hour size.  Second, nothing is compressed by the
pkzip program, it all fits on one 1.44 Meg floppy.  Third, the
errors given below have been fixed in the data, I will maintain a
complete errata list if you wish to add to it, please contact me.

Version 6.2 takes care of a few errors, and make the data more
consistent, such as finding a magnitude that was given as 08 and
changing that to 08.0, so that all the data appears the same to
the computer.

Several SAC members have been working with the NGC project to 
update the NGC and make certain that all the objects are identified
with the correct object in the sky.  The fruit of this undertaking
is in Version 7.0.  Dr. Harold Corwin and Wolfgang Steinike have
provided info on many NGC objects and have solved many puzzles 
concerning the NGC.  The number of truly unknown or unverified
objects has shrunk to a fraction of where we began and this 
version of the SAC database reflects that work.

