               REVISION HISTORY for SAC DATABASE

The goal of the people working on the Saguaro Astronomy Club database has
been to provide a listing which could yield an observing list for use at
the telescope.  The early versions covered plenty of objects for users of
scopes up to 8" in size.  As we added more objects and data, the list
became more massive and we believe that it now covers a large portion of
what could be seen in a telescope in the 10" to 14" range.  Addition of
many more objects will add many small and faint galaxies, seeing as that
is about all that remains below 14 magnitude.  We do not relish this task
and have no plans to undertake such a large work.

Version 1.0 consisted of 1100 objects down to a magnitude limit of about
11.5.  It was also the beginning of the multiple star file.

Version 2.0 started to add a variety of objects from the RNGC.  We soon
discovered an excellent list of corrections from Brian Skiff and Dr.
Harold Corwin.

Version 3.0 should not be used.  It is easy to spot the erroneous
data.  Look at M31, the Andromeda Galaxy, if its' declination is -31,
that is the bad version!!  We certainly learned a lot about
maintaining back ups to data.

Version 4.0 combined data from version 2.0 with the data input by Jeff
Weintraub from Sky Catalog 2000.  This version contains much good info
and started to show us how massive a fairly complete deep sky database
was going to get.  This was the first version to contain Dan Ward's
Report Generator.  This version was compressed with PKPAK 3.61.

After the release of version 4.0 many SAC members joined together in a
combined effort to try and find as much info as we could on objects each
person was assigned.  The listing of who-did-what is in SACDOC.TXT.
Several intermediate versions were compiled within the club, and then:

Version 5.0 fixed some problems with the DESCR field and included all the
NOTES which members had found.  With the inclusion of multistr, navstar,
potporri and Jim Lucyk's photondx files, this was the best version to date.
A medium to large telescope owner with good skies can keep busy with
version 5 for many observing sessions.  A.J. Crayon's install program will
put this version onto hard disk.  The files are no larger than 360K each,
to accommodate BBS operators.  SAC Report Generator has been rewritten to
include several more features.  This version was compressed with the
old compression algorithm so that we would only have to include ARCE on
disk to un-arc the files.

Version 5.1 fixed a small problem with the Report Generator.  It can now
search for objects with lower case characters in the name, such as
Cr or Tr.  If you are using your own database manager or if you do not
use SACREP to search for individual objects, the update is unnecessary.

Version 5.2 added several corrections, given in the file "errata50.txt".
Dan Ward updated the Report Generator.

Several internal versions existed within the SAC as we updated the
information and Dan Ward set up Report Generator to accommodate the
changes.  We dropped the SOURCE field, finding that we where doing a
poor job of keeping track of where each objects info source.  We
added the SUBR field with info from RC3 on surface brightness.
Sizes of several fields changed as the NOTES and NGC DESCR fields
got larger.  U2 and TIR fields got smaller because we found that
we did not need to provide multiple chart numbers for each object.

Version 6.0 contains all the changes mentioned above and accompanying
changes made to Report Generator.

Version 6.1 incorporates several changes which I believe are well
worth doing.  First, the database is in one large file and not
small pieces, RA hour size.  Second, nothing is compressed by the
pkzip program, it all fits on one 1.44 Meg floppy.  Third, the
errors given below have been fixed in the data, I will maintain a
complete errata list if you wish to add to it, please contact me.

Version 6.2 takes care of a few errors, and make the data more
consistent, such as finding a magnitude that was given as 08 and
changing that to 08.0, so that all the data appears the same to
the computer.

Version 7.0 is an outgrowth of the NGC project (www.ngcic.org) to 
update the NGC and make certain that all the objects are identified
with the correct object in the sky.  The fruit of this undertaking
is in Version 7.0.  Dr. Harold Corwin and Wolfgang Steinicke have
provided info on many NGC objects and have solved many puzzles 
concerning the NGC.  The number of truly unknown or unverified
objects has shrunk to a fraction of where we began and this 
version of the SAC database reflects that work.

Version 7.1 quickly followed 7.0 to fix several small, but
insidious, errors.  Four objects had quote marks within the
text and that created problems with importing the data into
a spreadsheet.  There was no "surface brightness" for about
50 objects.  And, NGC 2736 is a bright nebula, not a galaxy.
So, an afternoon spent repairing these problems makes version
7.1 as good as the SAC database as ever been, enjoy.

Version 7.2 also fixes a few errors, some of the NGC description
fields have capital "RI" which should be "Ri" for "Rich" cluster.
Also, a few places have a double comma with no quote between,
this confuses some database manager programs.  A few spelling
errors and typos in the Notes were also fixed.

Versions 7.3 and 7.4 are internal to the SAC group working on
the database.  They include changes in the data and additions
to the brightnesses of central stars of planetary nebulae and
open cluster data.  A few objects were both added and deleted.

Version 7.5 is a release that taught me quite a bit about using
Excel as a database manager.  It seemed to me that if you insert
a group of three objects, that Excel would create three rows for
the program so that the insert operation would not overwrite
prefectly good data.  
Not So!  In short, don't use version 7.5.

Version 7.7 is the latest release.  A big thank you to Auke 
Slotgraaf for help in double checking.

Version 8.0 gave us an opportunity to deal with the Barnard
Dark Nebulae.  The data we used in the past had grouped several
of these nebulae all together on one line and that is difficult
for a computer search routine to utilize.  So, this version
has each Barnard number given its own record.  All the 'B'
numbers are not provided, mostly because they are not very
distinct. This version also fixed a few remaining errors, mostly
in the NOTES area.

Version 8.1 provided a chance to take on a variety of small
errata that had been missed over the years.  Stephen Schrimpf
and I combed through the data and looked for some small and
persistent errata.

NOTE:  from April 2010 forward we will update a text file
on the SAC website which will contain any problems to be
fixed.  I have no doubt that there are a few, but we have 
done a fine job up to now keeping the data as free from
errors as we can.  From now on, users can update their own
copy of the data.

